
This is afio 2.5.1

To find out if this is the latest version, you can look at
http://freecode.com/projects/afio

The current maintainer is Koen Holtman (koen.holtman@ieee.org).

When mailing the maintainer, please use the word `afio' somewhere in
the subject line, this lowers the chance that your mail will get
accidentally deleted.

Alternative e-mail address for the maintainer: k.holtman@chello.nl

>> See the first lines of afio.c for licensing/redistribution information <<

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Afio makes cpio-format archives.  It deals somewhat gracefully with
input data corruption.  Supports multi-volume archives during
interactive operation.  Afio can make compressed archives that are
much safer than compressed tar or cpio archives.  Afio is best used as
an `archive engine' in a backup script.

Since version 2.4.8beta1, afio supports files greater than 2 GB.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

See the file INSTALLATION for installation instructions.

See the file SCRIPTS for more information on backup scripts that use
afio.

See the file PORTING for information on compiling afio on non-Linux
machines.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

This afio version is based on a Linux port of afio 2.3.  Since the
original port, significant functionality has been added and some bugs
were removed.  While primarily intended for use under Linux, this code
should be portable to other UNIX versions.  As far as I know, there
has been no afio development beyond 2.3 outside the Linux community.
Thus, it should be safe to advertise ports of this code to other UNIX
versions as ports of afio version 2.4.1.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
     
Afio has far too many options and features (some of which are not even
in the manual page).  Anything in afio that doesn't relate to reading
or writing an archive from/to a simple file or pipe or backing up and
restoring from floppies remains untested.

In particular, nobody has verified if the options -p -d -e -g -h -j -l
-m -u and -R and the special case archive name `!command' really do
what they claim to do.

Typical `tested' afio uses are
 ... | afio -o -v -s 1440k -F -Z /dev/fd0H1440
 afio -oZvx /tmp/pipe1 </tmp/pipe2
 afio -i -Z -k -v -x -n /tmp/pipe1
 ... | afio -s 512m -c 1024 -Z -T 20k -G 1 -E /backup/compressed -v -o \
       -L /backup/LOG -z /dev/tape 2>/dev/tty8 >/var/adm/backup

WARNING1: the code for -F (and -f and -K) is a complete mess.  It will
probably work in the normal case, but don't expect it to handle a
write/verify error correctly.  If you get such an error, best thing is
to restart afio completely.

WARNING2:The remote archive facilites (host:/file archive names) have
not been exhaustively tested. These facilities have seen a lot of
real-life use though.  However, there may be bugs in the code for
error handling and error reporting with remote archives.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

